http-core and Friends (#3513)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-http.md

# Introduction

> HTTP semantics {{!Semantics=I-D.ietf-httpbis-semantics}} are used for a broad

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTTP semantics {{!SEMANTICS=I-D.ietf-httpbis-semantics}} are used for a broad
```
All caps is, I think that is conventional.

> range of services on the Internet. These semantics have commonly been used with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
range of services on the Internet. These semantics have most commonly been used with
```

two different TCP mappings, HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2.  HTTP/3 supports the same
semantics over a new transport protocol, QUIC.

## Prior versions of HTTP

HTTP/1.1 {{?HTTP11=I-D.ietf-httpbis-messaging}} is a TCP mapping which uses
whitespace-delimited text fields to convey HTTP messages.  While these exchanges
are human-readable, using whitespace for message formatting leads to parsing

> difficulties and workarounds to be tolerant of variant behavior. Because each

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
complexity and motivates tolerance of variant behavior. Because each
```

Motivates may not be the best word, but requires was my other suggestion, and that's not quite accurate.

connection can transfer only a single HTTP request or response at a time in each
direction, multiple parallel TCP connections are often used, reducing the

> ability of the congestion controller to accurately manage traffic between

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ability of the congestion controller to effectively manage traffic between
```

endpoints.

HTTP/2 {{?HTTP2=RFC7540}} introduced a binary framing and multiplexing layer to
improve latency without modifying the transport layer.  However, because the
parallel nature of HTTP/2's multiplexing is not visible to TCP's loss recovery
mechanisms, a lost or reordered packet causes all active transactions to

> experience a stall regardless of whether that transaction was impacted by the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
experience a stall regardless of whether that transaction was directly impacted by the
```

potential latency gain.  Several HTTP/3 frames are used to manage server push,
such as PUSH_PROMISE, MAX_PUSH_ID, and CANCEL_PUSH.

As in HTTP/2, request and response fields are compressed for transmission.
Because HPACK {{?HPACK=RFC7541}} relies on in-order transmission of compressed

> field blocks (a guarantee not provided by QUIC), HTTP/3 replaces HPACK with

Reviewer 3: "field sections" is the term of art - see https://httpwg.org/http-core/draft-ietf-httpbis-semantics-latest.html#header.fields
```suggestion
field sections (a guarantee not provided by QUIC), HTTP/3 replaces HPACK with
```

Author: The problem is that "header blocks" was an HPACK term of art:  The sequence of compressed bytes containing the header set.  I think in this section we need to do QPACK first, then apply the appropriate terms to H3 once we've got them straight over there.

Reviewer 3: There is no concept of header (or trailer) blocks in QPACK -- it doesn't split things up into multiple frames like HPACK/H2 did.

Author: e92c94f matches the removal of "blocks" from #3520.

QPACK [QPACK].  QPACK uses separate unidirectional streams to modify and track

> field table state, while field blocks refer to the state of the table without

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
field table state, while field sections refer to the state of the table without
```

Author: See QPACK comment above.

experimental implementation based on draft-ietf-quic-http-09 which reserves an
extra stream for unsolicited transmission of 1980s pop music might identify
itself as "h3-09-rickroll". Note that any label MUST conform to the "token"
syntax defined in Section 4.4.1.1 of {{!SEMANTICS}}. Experimenters are
encouraged to coordinate their experiments on the quic@ietf.org mailing list.

## Discovering an HTTP/3 Endpoint {#discovery}

An HTTP origin advertises the availability of an equivalent HTTP/3 endpoint via

> the Alt-Svc HTTP response field or the HTTP/2 ALTSVC frame

Reviewer 3: AIUI Alt-Svc is a header field, so this is fine either way.

field names and values are discussed in more detail in Section 4.3 of
{{!SEMANTICS}}.  As in HTTP/2, field names MUST be converted to lowercase prior
to their encoding.  A request or response containing uppercase field names MUST
be treated as malformed ({{malformed}}).

Like HTTP/2, HTTP/3 does not use the Connection field to indicate
connection-specific fields; in this protocol, connection-specific metadata is
conveyed by other means.  An endpoint MUST NOT generate an HTTP/3 message
containing connection-specific fields; any message containing
connection-specific fields MUST be treated as malformed ({{malformed}}).

The only exception to this is the TE field, which MAY be present in an HTTP/3
request header; when it is, it MUST NOT contain any value other than "trailers".

This means that an intermediary transforming an HTTP/1.x message to HTTP/3 will
need to remove any fields nominated by the Connection field, along with the
Connection field itself.  Such intermediaries SHOULD also remove other
connection-specific fields, such as Keep-Alive, Proxy-Connection,
Transfer-Encoding, and Upgrade, even if they are not nominated by the Connection
field.

> #### Pseudo-Fields

Author: "Pseudo-header fields" is an odd term no matter how you slice it, unless you say that the beginning of the header part is the "pseudo-header" and these are the fields that occur there.  I'd be open to defining that term, I suppose.

> #### Pseudo-Fields

Reviewer 3: There are not pseudo-trailer fields, and I fervently hope we won't be defining any. Let's just keep it as pseudo-header.

and ":path" pseudo-fields, unless it is a CONNECT request ({{connect}}).
An HTTP request that omits mandatory pseudo-fields or contains invalid
values for those pseudo-fields is malformed ({{malformed}}).

HTTP/3 does not define a way to carry the version identifier that is included in
the HTTP/1.1 request line.

For responses, a single ":status" pseudo-field is defined that carries the HTTP
status code (see Section 9 of {{!SEMANTICS}}).  This pseudo-field
MUST be included in all responses; otherwise, the response is malformed
({{malformed}}).

HTTP/3 does not define a way to carry the version or reason phrase that is
included in an HTTP/1.1 status line.

#### Field Compression

HTTP/3 uses QPACK field compression as described in [QPACK], a variation of
HPACK which allows the flexibility to avoid compression-induced head-of-line
blocking.  See that document for additional details.

To allow for better compression efficiency, the "Cookie" field {{!RFC6265}}
MAY be split into separate field lines, each with one or more cookie-pairs,
before compression. If a decompressed field list contains multiple cookie

> header fields, these MUST be concatenated into a single octet string using the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
fields, these MUST be concatenated into a single octet string using the
```

Author: Should be "field lines," actually.  Good catch!

the body of the request and close the stream normally.

### Field Formatting and Compression {#header-formatting}

HTTP messages carry metadata as a series of key-value pairs, called HTTP fields.
For a listing of registered HTTP fields, see the "Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP) Field Name Registry" maintained at
<https://www.iana.org/assignments/http-fields/>.

> Just as in previous versions of HTTP, field names are strings of ASCII

Reviewer 3: Hm. It's not _all_ ASCII characters.

Author: Field names are defined to be `token`, which is `1*tchar`, which is "any visible US-ASCII character" "except delimiters."  Are there non-ASCII values in that?

Reviewer 3: _except delimiters_. This spec should either just refer to the authoritative definition (preferred), or accurately describe them.

Author: Ah, I misunderstood the direction of your comment. I'll update in the morning.

Reviewer 3: Looks good.

characters that are compared in a case-insensitive fashion.  Properties of HTTP
field names and values are discussed in more detail in Section 4.3 of
{{!SEMANTICS}}.  As in HTTP/2, field names MUST be converted to lowercase prior

> to their encoding.  A request or response containing uppercase field names MUST

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to their encoding.  A request or response containing uppercase characters in field names MUST
```

be treated as malformed ({{malformed}}).

> Like HTTP/2, HTTP/3 does not use the Connection field to indicate

Reviewer 3: Again, it's perfectly OK to call it a "header field" if it hasn't said it can be used in trailers.

connection-specific fields; in this protocol, connection-specific metadata is

> conveyed by other means.  An endpoint MUST NOT generate an HTTP/3 message

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
conveyed by other means.  An endpoint MUST NOT generate an HTTP/3 field section
```

    of {{?HTTP11}}).

All HTTP/3 requests MUST include exactly one value for the ":method", ":scheme",
and ":path" pseudo-fields, unless it is a CONNECT request ({{connect}}).
An HTTP request that omits mandatory pseudo-fields or contains invalid
values for those pseudo-fields is malformed ({{malformed}}).

HTTP/3 does not define a way to carry the version identifier that is included in
the HTTP/1.1 request line.

For responses, a single ":status" pseudo-field is defined that carries the HTTP
status code (see Section 9 of {{!SEMANTICS}}).  This pseudo-field
MUST be included in all responses; otherwise, the response is malformed
({{malformed}}).

HTTP/3 does not define a way to carry the version or reason phrase that is
included in an HTTP/1.1 status line.

#### Field Compression

HTTP/3 uses QPACK field compression as described in [QPACK], a variation of
HPACK which allows the flexibility to avoid compression-induced head-of-line
blocking.  See that document for additional details.

To allow for better compression efficiency, the "Cookie" field {{!RFC6265}} MAY
be split into separate field lines, each with one or more cookie-pairs, before

> compression. If a decompressed field list contains multiple cookie field lines,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
compression. If a decompressed field section contains multiple cookie field lines,
```

{{!SEMANTICS}}.  As in HTTP/2, characters in field names MUST be converted to
lowercase prior to their encoding.  A request or response containing uppercase
characters in field names MUST be treated as malformed ({{malformed}}).

Like HTTP/2, HTTP/3 does not use the Connection header field to indicate
connection-specific fields; in this protocol, connection-specific metadata is
conveyed by other means.  An endpoint MUST NOT generate an HTTP/3 field section
containing connection-specific fields; any message containing
connection-specific fields MUST be treated as malformed ({{malformed}}).

The only exception to this is the TE header field, which MAY be present in an
HTTP/3 request header; when it is, it MUST NOT contain any value other than
"trailers".

This means that an intermediary transforming an HTTP/1.x message to HTTP/3 will
need to remove any fields nominated by the Connection field, along with the
Connection field itself.  Such intermediaries SHOULD also remove other
connection-specific fields, such as Keep-Alive, Proxy-Connection,
Transfer-Encoding, and Upgrade, even if they are not nominated by the Connection
field.

#### Pseudo-Header Fields

> As in HTTP/2, HTTP/3 uses a series of pseudo-header field lines beginning with

Author: Ah, the pedanticism warms the cockles of my cold, picky heart.  😉  Well caught!

> As in HTTP/2, HTTP/3 uses a series of pseudo-header field lines beginning with

Reviewer: @MikeBishop, you might want to consider seeing a physician about that.  Sounds serious.

the ':' character (ASCII 0x3a) to convey the target URI, the method of the
request, and the status code for the response.

Pseudo-header fields are not HTTP fields.  Endpoints MUST NOT generate
pseudo-header fields other than those defined in this document, except as
negotiated via an extension; see {{extensions}}.

> Pseudo-fields are only valid in the context in which they are defined.

Author: That's what it was in an earlier version of this PR; the pushback was that these only occur in the header, not in trailers, so it's more precise to say header fields than simply fields.  I agree that "pseudo-header field" makes it sound like there's a region called the "pseudo-header," and there kind of is since these have to be first, but we don't call it that.

A malformed request or response is one that is an otherwise valid sequence of
frames but is invalid due to:

- the presence of prohibited fields or pseudo-fields,
- the absence of mandatory pseudo-fields,
- invalid values for pseudo-fields,
- pseudo-fields after fields,
- an invalid sequence of HTTP messages, or
- the inclusion of uppercase field names.

A request or response that includes a payload body can include a

> `content-length` field.  A request or response is also malformed if the value of

Reviewer 3: Again, C-L is very definitely a header field; it cannot appear in a trailer.

Due to reordering, push stream data can arrive before the corresponding
PUSH_PROMISE frame.  When a client receives a new push stream with an
as-yet-unknown Push ID, both the associated client request and the pushed

> request fields are unknown.  The client can buffer the stream data in

Reviewer 3: Can you push request trailers?

Due to reordering, push stream data can arrive before the corresponding
PUSH_PROMISE frame.  When a client receives a new push stream with an
as-yet-unknown Push ID, both the associated client request and the pushed

> request headerss are unknown.  The client can buffer the stream data in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
request header fields are unknown.  The client can buffer the stream data in
```

H3_REQUEST_CANCELLED. This asks the server not to transfer additional data and
indicates that it will be discarded upon receipt.

Pushed responses that are cacheable (see Section 3 of

> {{!Caching=I-D.ietf-httpbis-cache}}) can be stored by the client, if it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{!CACHING=I-D.ietf-httpbis-cache}}) can be stored by the client, if it
```

### HEADERS {#frame-headers}

The HEADERS frame (type=0x1) is used to carry a block of HTTP fields, compressed
using QPACK. See [QPACK] for more details.

~~~~~~~~~~  drawing

>  0                   1                   2                   3

Reviewer 4: the diagram still contains "Header Block"

### PUSH_PROMISE {#frame-push-promise}

The PUSH_PROMISE frame (type=0x5) is used to carry a promised request header
field set from server to client on a request stream, as in HTTP/2.

~~~~~~~~~~  drawing
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                          Push ID (i)                        ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

> |                        Field Block (*)                      ...

Reviewer 3: See previous comments about Block v Section.

### PUSH_PROMISE {#frame-push-promise}

The PUSH_PROMISE frame (type=0x5) is used to carry a promised request header
field set from server to client on a request stream, as in HTTP/2.

~~~~~~~~~~  drawing

>  0                   1                   2                   3

Reviewer 4: the diagram still contains "Header Block"
